---
title: Init
date: 2026-07-17
---

The goal of this project is to gain some experience in system architecture. Not only the frontend part, as my focus have been previously. I, for instance, did a artist portfolio project app with a CMS system ([https://nataliadziuk.pl/](https://nataliadziuk.pl/) btw), where the goal was to make a working project from start to finish, abstracting as much as I could. There my learning goal was to simply learn to orchestrate multiple parts with a db, authentication and so on. 

The plain is a a small social app running as multiple containers behind a load balancer, with a split database, deployed on AWS.

I will lay out decisions and log progress here.

**Features**
The features are simple and are only there so i have some content to work with regarding managing the project architecture.

* login/signup
* post
* like
* feed

**Stack**
The stack is simple enough for me to work with, no super abstract or industry standard stuff all the way, so I can see and learn off the open wires so to say. 

* FastAPI
* PostgreSQL
* SQLAlchemy
* Docker
* Nginx
* AWS

**Authentication**
Another decision to be made is how auth should work. The two options I considered were server-side session and JSON Web Token (JWT).
The difference between these two (for my scale of project), is where the authentication state is stored. For the simpler server-side option, when the user logs in, the server generates a session id table entry for the user, generating an accompanying id, that is then sent to the user. This id is valid for a period of time, and as long it's valid the the user can provide the id, and the server will know that it's the verified user, since this id exists in the table and is connected to a user.

The JWT works similarly, but the authentication state is stateless. When a user logs in the server, credentials are verified, and a token based on the user information is generated using a private key. Then the token is sent to the user and forgotten by the server. All future user requests contain this token, and the server verifies the token by verifying its signature based on the JWT content. If the signature is valid, the user has successfully been authenticated.


For simplicity, I will go with the first option. This will simplify the app's authentication process. It will technically be more complex system-wise, meaning there will have to be some kind of central user state db that will be another player in the game, rather than a on-the-spot-verification. But I see more complexity on this side more beneficial for learning system design like this, rather than a more complex code-solution.
